Valuing information for management
==================================

Improving the future of Box Ironbark forests with targeted learning
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Victoria's Box-Ironbark forests are an ecological community home to many unique
flora and fauna including nationally threatened Swift Parrots, Regent
Honeyeaters and dozens of EPBC listed plants. Much of the Box-Ironbark forest
was cleared or degraded during and in the aftermath of the 19th century's
gold rush. But in the early 2000's much of what remained, over 200,000 hectares,
was protected in new national parks and conservation reserves, significantly
expanding the protected area network in the state of Victoria.

Now under the custodianship of Parks Victoria, a key objective of these public
lands is to ensure the persistence of functioning ecological communities and
species populations. Managers knew that to achieve this goal required mature 
Box-Ironbark forests containing large, old trees and a diverse understorey of
shrubs and herbs. But they were concerned that a majority of the region's forest
consisted of immature regrowth, still recovering from recent disturbance, that
did not provide the biodiversity resources of mature forests. Therefore, Parks
Victoria and other regional managers sought to manage the forests to maximise
the speed of recovery of mature Box-Ironbark.

Compared to other forest types, Box-Ironbark forests have less silvicultural
value and their dynamics less understood, making predicting the outcome of
management relatively uncertain. The 2001 report[^ECC2001] which recommended
the creation of the new national parks also recommended ecological thinning be
used to manage the Box Ironbark forests and assist the development of mature
forests. Ecological thinning is the active reduction of tree density by removing
some trees. Forests are thinned to a density that approximates the density at
maturity. The reduction in density aims to improve forest health as the 
remaining trees should have greater available resources and should achieve
faster growth rates.

Given uncertainty in the outcome of managing the Box-Ironbark forests, a model
was built based on expert opinions[^Czembor2009]. The model simulated the
outcome of three management strategies, a pre-protection strategy with some
extractive practices remaining, a post-protection non-intervention scenario, and
protection with the addition of ecological thinning. The models were used to
predict the outcome of each strategy after 150 years. These models indicated 
that given the current understanding of these ecosystems the non-intervention
strategy had the best expected outcome.

However, the experts acknowledged and were able to quantify considerable
uncertainty in predicting Box-Ironbark forest dynamics. And furthermore, of the
three categories of uncertainty, between expert (experts disagreeing with one
another), within expert (a given expert being unsure) and system stochasticity
(the inherent variability in the ecosystem due to chance), the two expert driven
components were the largest[^Czembor2011]. Having a model with expert
opinion-based uncertainty presents a compelling case for improving management
via learning. But how should managers decide whether improving the model with
new information is worthwhile? And if it is, what should they try to learn about
and how much new information should they attempt to acquire? We sought answers
to each of these questions by taking the Box-Ironbark forest simulation model
and using it to perform a "value of information analysis"[^Morris2017].

A value of information analysis simply asks what is the expected outcome of
management if no new information is sought compared to what is the expected
outcome of management if a decision is made after learning something new and
accounting for the possible results of that learning. For a manager, the first
requirement is to show that the expected outcome after learning is greater than
the expected outcome without new information. In this case we found that if we
could resolve all the uncertainty in the model we would expect management to
result in an increase in the percentage of mature Box-Ironbark Forests from 35%
to 42% after 150 years (the current estimate of mature forest is approximately
16%).

But it is probably being too optimistic to expect that resolving all uncertainty
will be cost effective. For it only makes sense to resolve uncertainty if the
cost of acquiring the new information is lower than expected benefit. An
alternative to resolving uncertainty completely, is to target learning at
specific aspect of the system. For example, when seeking more information about
Box-Ironbark management it was found that targeting learning about the effects
of the non-intervention scenario had a greater expected outcome for management
than targeting learning towards either of the other management options.

The Box-Ironbark case-study is yet another example that demonstrates the utility
of value of information analysis. In this case, as in others, a value of
information analysis represents an important guide for managers seeking to
update the understanding of system they are seeking to manage cost-effectively.

[^ECC2001]: [
  Environment Conservation Council. 2001. Box-ironbark forests and forests
  investigation: final report. Technical report, Environment Conservation
  Council, East Melbourne, Victoria.
  ](http://www.veac.vic.gov.au/reports/385-BI-Complete-Report.pdf)

[^Czembor2009]: [
  Czembor, C.A., and Vesk, P.A. 2009. Incorporating between-expert 
  uncertainty into state-and-transition simulation models for forest
  restoration. Forest Ecology and Management 259:165–175.
  ](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0378112709007269)

[^Czembor2011]: [
  Czembor, C.A., Morris, W.K., Wintle, B.A. and Vesk, P.A. 2011. Quantifying 
  variance components in ecological models based on expert opinion. Journal of
  Applied Ecology 48:736–745.
  ](https://besjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1365-2664.2011.01971.x)

[^Morris2017]: [
  Morris, W.K., Runge, M.C. and P.A. Vesk. 2017. The value of information for 
  woodland management: updating a state–transition model. Ecosphere 8:e01998
  ](https://esajournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/ecs2.1998)
